because the memes were not unlike the
dreams. And so the dreamification of um
my character was similar to me to the
memeification of Nicholas Cage.
>> Nicholas Cage is a truly one-of-a-kind
artist.
>> He's delivered beautifully moving
naturalistic performances like his
Oscar-winning turn in Leaving Las Vegas.
>> Well, can't you just cash it as it is?
and he's brought a distinctly
post-modern imagination to other roles,
pulling in references from film, music,
and art.
>> I felt that Wild at Heart performance
was worth hauling.
>> We got some dancing to do.
>> I interviewed Cage once before in 2019,
and I wanted to talk to him again as he
makes his first big foray into
television with the series Spider Noir,
a very cajian take on Spider-Man. I'm
taking the reverence I have for the
actors that I cherish like Bogart or
Kagner or Edward G. Robinson or Peter
Lorie from those old movies and I'm
saying look at this.
>> What else can I say except that there's
no one like him or that in my opinion
he's the most original and unique actor
since Marlon Brando.
>> Nick.
Yes, sir. Where where's your leather
jacket?
>> Here's my conversation with the great
Nicholas Cage.
All right, Nick, thank you for taking
the time to speak with me. I appreciate
it.
>> Thanks, David. Thanks for having me
back. I enjoyed our last conversation
seven years ago in Nevada.
>> We'll pick up where we left off.
>> Okay.
>> Um,
which I don't remember. But where I
wanted to start, I just watched the uh
the speech you gave to graduates at Cal
State Fullerton. This is probably
something like 25 years ago,
>> going way back. Um and and and in that
speech you said artists have the license
to go straight up the devil's ass, smile
at him, and survive.
When have you done that? Uh
um
I felt like I did it on Bad Lieutenant
with Verer Herzog.
And Verer was an influence on that
particular speech because I remember he
said if you don't have the money to make
the movie, you have to steal the camera
and you have to steal the film and make
the movie. Do it any way you can. You've
got to make the movie. And I think it
was uh saying something about passion,
about the passion of facing the odds to
get to the truth of what it is you hope
to express as as an artist. Sometimes
you have to um be willing to uh within
reason allow your instrument, your
psyche, your imagination to go to very
uncomfortable and dark corners of your
memory or of your uh your your your
thoughts in order to convey a truth in a
scene that is
perhaps disturbing or dangerous. in
nature so that it doesn't feel phony.
I'm not saying go out and do something
dangerous, but I'm saying sometimes you
have to allow your psyche, if you will,
to embrace that dark corner of your
mind. And I think that's partially what
I was talking about in that speech
about, as you said, re reiterated, go up
the devil's ass. It's not always a fun
process to go there, to go back in that
dark corner of your mind or that memory
or even look around you at current
events in a newspaper to get to that
place where you feel the emotion and you
feel the grief or you feel the anger so
that you don't feel like you're faking
it.
>> Have you ever done what you just
described? Sort of used the the world
outside, sort of looked at current
events to motivate
>> Certainly. I I remember specifically on
a a little movie I made called Joe.
>> Joe. Yeah. David Gordon Green. Yeah.
>> And um I was having trouble getting to
that feeling of intense anger.
And without mentioning names, I I I
recalled a newspaper article I read
about a a little boy who was at the zoo
and he fell into a a
well a cage or an environment of wild uh
painted dogs, the African painted dogs,
and they ate the the child alive. And I
remember getting very upset about it
that how could something like that
happen? And so in that scene, I was
upset that this child that I was sort of
mentoring or guiding was the victim of
uh domestic abuse and of uh his sister
was uh um potentially going to be
abducted for other disturbing and
horrible things, atrocities. And so I I
I I went and looked at that current
event at that time and I and then it got
me there. So that would be an example.
>> You know, it's interesting when actors
talk about um sort of the the
psychological or emotional risks of of
performance. They often talk about it in
the context of darker emotions. Is it
does it feel risky or difficult to get
to the more positive emotions?
>> So that's a really
perfect question.
And um
if I wake up in the morning
to use a cliche on the wrong side of the
bed and I have to be funny funny and
happy happy happy and dance dance dance
dance dance dance dance dance dance
dance dance and this and this you know
bright and sparkling and poppy that is
more difficult that is much more
challenging well how do you how do you
get there you you you become a
specialist in compartmentalizing
Okay, that I'm not going to think about
what was said to me an hour ago. I am
going to shut that off and act from the
spinal cord and be happy and turn it on.
And that's not easy. Um, you know, also
in in that Cal State Fullerton speech,
something you said that that really um
stuck with me is, you know, you you
talked about a willingness to invite
negative reaction to the work, a
willingness to to uh be despised or or
have someone not like the work. and you
said something along the lines of, you
know, it's when somebody has a negative
reaction like that, they're not BSing.
Like they're it's a genuine reaction and
that's something that you're you're
striving for. And I I think about that a
lot actually. Like if you're if you're
only doing something that people like
all the time or only have positive
reactions to, it's possible you're not
taking them on an exciting of enough
ride. Um, but it does take it takes some
courage to be willing to be despised or
or laughed at or misunderstood. And I
wanted to know for you if if you have a
memory of when you realized that you
were willing to elicit that kind of
reaction or maybe even were drawn to
that kind of reaction.
>> Um, I think it was on Peggy Sue Got
Married.
um which everyone knows was a movie that
I I did not really want to uh partake in
and I found a way and and u the powers
that be said okay to to play the part in
a way that I thought would be
interesting to me which was to use this
voice that was not uh considered very
attractive
>> that's my love
What
you mean? Sex.
>> Um, and to change my appearance in such
a way where it almost became like a
cartoon or like a dream cartoon. I knew
full well that that was not going to go
over very well, but at the same time,
it's what kept me interested. It's it's
what I knew that I was taking an
enormous risk, but
it was so exciting. Every day I went to
work and I was just saying in my mind,
I'm going to I'm going to do this. I'm
going to stick to it. I'm going to stick
to it. I'm going to stick to it. And
everyone else around me is like, stop,
stop, stop. And I I just kept going. And
I'm very happy with that performance for
me. And I think in time it's matured in
a way that's it's actually quite
wonderful. Um, and I'm glad I did it.
But but in the process it was uh I knew
I was going to invite a lot of um
negative commentary.
>> But then after Peggy Sue got married,
>> right,
>> you did you did other performances where
you were taking things to places that
were were probably likely going to be
misunderstood.
>> Yeah.
>> Was that a result of liking what you had
done on Peggy Sue Got Married personally
like that you you did? Yeah,
>> it was a personal choice of mine that I
was carving something that I wanted to
bring to life and have it shine in in
that way. Francis Bacon famously said in
his book, The Brutality of Fact, that
it's impossible to record anything as a
fact without causing some injury to the
image. So, I was actively looking for at
times the grotesque like a bacon
painting, vampires kiss. Even raising
Arizona, I was challenging Joel and
Ethan because I was sticking to my plan
that he was going to hi Mcdana was going
to have this kind of Woody Woodpecker
Looney Tunes style.
>> STATE FARM ROAD NUMBER 31, TEMPE,
ARIZONA. I'LL BE WAITING.
>> Which they originally liked, but there
were days where they were frustrated and
they did were like, why did I why did
you know I could have cast this person
and I could have cast that person. Then
I finally just said, well, why did you
hire me? And that stopped that
conversation. But and the results on
that I think are terrific. I think that
that was a great union. Joel, Ethan, and
myself and Holly. I think we got
somewhere together that was remarkably
funny, but at the time it was right on
the edge. Um, and then Vampires Kiss, of
course. I mean, I I was really uh
struggling on that one because I had a
very specific vision of what I wanted. I
wanted to bring a Max Shrek like style
back into um the sort of 80s yepy. This
is before American Psycho attitude of
like the the the the literary agent
who's going to the best restaurants and
he's going on dates and and then slowly
devolving into a vampire and thinking he
is a vampire and that I wanted to bring
out the Shrek-like behavior and I did
the horrible thing that I don't need to
go back to with the you know the
ingestion of that thing and and um
>> cockroach.
>> Yeah. Right. Well, that all that was me
trying to make a big noise to say we're
going to do this. We're going to do
something different.
>> But th some of those performances that
you just mentioned uh sort of bring to
mind a question I had that's going to be
uh a little in the weeds for for most
people uh other than you, me, and
Nicholas Cage fans, but uh I'm going to
do it anyway. So, I think one of the
innovative things that you brought to
acting was almost a kind of there's sort
of like a post-modern
uh almost metatextual element to it
where you would take elements from
genres that were outside of film and
performance
uh and sort of outside of the character
you were trying to play and import them
into what you were doing. So, I I'll
give examples. But I remember when I
spoke to you last time there's I asked
you about this scream that you gave in a
movie called Rage and you explained that
you were trying to emulate some sort of
stockhousen sonic effect with THAT
TO YOUR BOSS
>> or uh in Face Off there's a moment where
uh your character sort of goes up behind
a school girl and and your face raises
up and you're doing like a Francis Bacon
style look to the camera or in Mandy
there's a a scene I think your character
is in a car and you you look quickly at
the camera and the camera zooms into a
close-up like a Bruce Lee movie. And
there's any number of other examples
like the Woody Woodpecker Raising
Arizona. Um I I could keep going, but
are there similar examples of you doing
that kind of technique that um sort of
you haven't seen remarked on? Like when
have you done that that and people have
not noticed?
Well, I don't know if they've known the
specifics
that went into the choices in terms of
what you're calling metatitual. I would
call the um the art synthesis concept
that I was dabbling in. Um
where I could pull from other art forms
and have them inform my performance.
And I I like to take from places whether
it's in film performance like you
mentioned Bruce Lee or or whether it's
in
graphic art or any other art stockous
we were talking about punk and stemong I
think
>> um in this case and I will let you know
I I did it again I felt that the the the
wild at heart performance was Warholian,
not Stannislavski. Warholian in that
Warhol would take these icons and um do
these marvelous collages with them. I
thought, well, why not do that with film
performance and David Lynch being David
Lynch, the the great American
surrealist, was really up for that.
Which brings me to Spider Noir. So, so
>> yeah,
>> we'll circle. I can get there now or you
I could circle back.
>> Just go for it. Just go where you're
going.
>> Well, so Duchamp shovel started this
idea I think in pop art of taking a
utilitarian tool and isolating it and we
could regard it as fine art. And then
you had Warhol doing that with the soup
cans. And then I looked at all that and
then I looked at Likenstein and
Likensstein utilized a or or or embraced
a uh mass
utility in the comic strip and uh broke
it down all the way to the little
printing press dots that you see from
the printing press and he threw it into
a still life and that became a kind of
Serat poalism. But it was a likenstein
taking irreverence and reverence in a in
a comic graphic and making it fine art
and almost being irreverent about fine
art while doing it. So what what am I
doing with Spider Noir is I'm taking the
reverence I have for the actors that I
cherish like Bogart or Kagner or Edward
G. Robinson or Peter Lori from those old
movies
and I'm taking the mass util utility of
the television or the tube if you will
and I'm trying to mash that that
reverence I have up with a pop icon a
Marvel icon in in Spider-Man if you will
and make a collision in such a way that
I'm taking television which is a mass
tool that every the many people embibe
on and and ingest and I'm saying look at
this so that maybe the hope is that a
young person in their teens would go oh
wow what is that that's uh that's black
and white I'm not too familiar with
black and white I can watch it in color
but I can also watch it in black and
white what is black and white oh my gosh
there's this immense
volume of beautiful art that all these
early actors were in let me check that
out Let's go look at that. And oh, and
by the way, he's Spider-Man. So, it's
like this boom, this this crazy
Likenstein collision. So, that is
metatextual or my art synthesis concept.
Again, now the fact that
Amy Pascal at Sony, Jen Sulky at Amazon,
Orura New Zeal, and Steven Lightfoot
let me. I'm still amazed by
>> So when you're in uh meetings about
doing a project like Spider Noir,
>> yeah.
>> Do you do you explain the Likenstein
stuff or
>> No, I don't.
>> I'll keep that I'll keep keep that under
my vest.
>> I didn't I didn't break out the
Likenstein in those meetings. I can do
it with you because we can talk the same
language sometimes. But with with for
example with Jen Sulky at Amazon, I went
over to her house and we all sat there.
All the powers of be were there. And I
just said, you know, it doesn't matter
if a 13-year-old doesn't know who
Humphrey Bogart is. The point is it
works. It works. I know it works. And I
remember calling Jen saying, "You don't
have to only do it in black and white.
You can also do it in color." And then
they can hopcotch back and check it out
in black and white. And then lo and
behold, maybe they'll want to see the
Big Sleep or Maltese Falcon.
>> You know, I had zero interest in
watching the color version.
>> Thank you. Well, I I I I think folks
like us, real film enthusiasts will go
with the black and white, but I'm hoping
that the 13-year-olds, the 15year-old,
whomever, will see the color and go,
"Well, let me try the black and white.
What were they?" And I think they will.
I mean, there's a real Are we doing
spoilers in this interview? Well, it's
fine with me. You're you're you're the
one who has to decide.
>> I mean, I I I really wanted to see a a
version of a Spider-Man that was
grappling with the arachnid
DNA that was flowing through his
bloodstream and having to retrain
himself as to how to be human. Uh um I
have a couple more questions about
acting, but before I do, there's
something I was curious about related to
spiders. I know you've had a lot of
exotic pets. Have you had a spider?
>> Oh, sure. Sure. I've had spiders,
tarantulas. Uh,
>> well, I even learned a little bit about
the the the the movement of spiders, and
I put that in the in the script. Um,
spiders don't have muscles. Their
appendages are like straws. They shoot
fluid. So, they're the fluid is making
their appendages move, which is
fascinating to me. It's like a party
whistle. All that went into the script.
Um, there is a a spider that I found
fascinating, which is listed as one of
the more intelligent animals and it's
called the Porsche spider. And this
spider, this spider is so intelligent,
it literally
knows what bug likes what which tune on
his web. So he knows what to play to get
the fly and he knows what to play to get
the grasshopper. And that's really
something that exists. I thought that
was fascinating.
>> This is uh um slightly related. I read
there was a a Reddit ask me anything you
did a couple years back, right?
>> And someone someone asked you about
>> I think I don't even remember what the
question was, but the subject of praying
mantises came up and you said don't get
me something like don't get me started
on praying mantises. Why not?
>> Well, I think it was the same movie we
had talked about years ago with that
great line, I never had a career, only
work. Uh the uh Hammer horror film. Um
>> Oh. Uh
>> A Million Miles to Earth or something.
Uh
>> well, not a million miles.
>> Quater Mass. Quater Mass in the Pit.
That's it.
>> Whoa. You have a good memory. Holy moly.
You remember that?
>> Yeah. Well, that
>> that's something you mentioned in
passing seven years ago.
>> Those aliens in that looked like praying
mantises. And it flipped me out. I was
very impressionable as a child. Which
brings me to another reason why I'm glad
that I managed to finally do a season of
television
because I think even before I discovered
James Dean and Brando,
I was I was w I was all about my
television, the Zenith Oval television
in my living room. And I wanted to get
inside that TV because the people those
little people in that TV were far more
interesting to me than the people in my
living room. And I think that was my
earliest memory of wanting to be an
actor. It was people like Bill Bixby and
Peter Faulk and Rock Hudson and McMillan
and wife and Dennis Weaver and Mloud and
I I loved and anything by Rod Serling.
So the television and it's amazing it's
only happened now was largely
responsible for me wanting to become an
actor. At the earliest age like 3, four,
five, six, the TV was the savior of my
childhood.
>> Why the savior? Well, there I mean I
don't want to go into too much detail,
but it was not the calmst domestic
environment and the I could go and
escape in the TV uh by watching shows or
I could go in the backyard. Amazing how
much time I spent in the backyard
without anybody checking on me. Just I
started digging a hole. I thought I was
going to dig my way to China and I kept
digging and digging and digging and
digging and nobody found the hole and I
had a shovel and I kept digging. And I
saw roots and I saw weird bugs and I
kept digging and digging and someone
finally said and I would cover the hole
with a plank of plywood and someone
uncovered and said, "Do you see what
Nikki's doing? Oh my god, look at the
size of this hole."
>> Then what was the upshot? Did you get in
trouble for the hole?
>> Well, the upshot was it rained and then
it was filled with water and I had like
a pond of sorts. But yes, I did get in
trouble for the hole. I got in trouble
for the hole and I got in trouble for
because evil conneal was big back then.
I got in trouble for jumping off ramps
on my Huffy uh uh bike going higher and
higher. And I remember at one point I
was going to put on a show for the
neighborhood and I would jump over beer
kegs. I don't know how I had beer kegs.
There were beer kegs and I would go over
one, two, three, four on my ramp. And
then I had decided I was going to build
a hoop of fire. I was going to build
this round thing out of cardboard and
douse it with kerosene light on fire.
I'm going to jump through a hoop of
fire, folks. And that was when they took
the bike away.
>> Yeah, fair enough.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, wait, let me return to acting for a
second.
>> Sure.
>> Was that Was that Hoopifier thing real,
by the way?
>> Which which one?
>> You weren't just improvising that.
>> No, that's all No, that's all all true.
These are all true stories.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so I there was an interview just a
couple years ago where the the
somehow the subject of sort of
retirement came up and and you said, you
know, you're no imminent plans, but
maybe you had some plans to dial back.
But one thing that you said was that you
felt
>> like you had pushed screen performance
as far as it could go. And I want to
know where did you find the limits? like
where did you push it to and what what
were the b the ultimate boundaries for
what you were able to do?
>> But David, I don't think it was so much
that I pushed it to the limit. I think I
I I couldn't come up with I wasn't able
to come up with any more ideas as to
what to do with it. Uh,
>> I felt like I had realized, you know,
for better or for worse, for myself, I
had realized for better what I had
wanted to achieve with film performance
with things like Vampires Kiss and and
Raising Arizona and adaptation. I I kept
pushing the envelope in terms of
different points of expression within
film performance. And I felt that I had
said what I wanted to say with cinema,
landing on Dream Scenario, which I'm
very proud of. and um thinking, well,
how am I going to what what's next? How
am I going to stay interested? What am I
going to do? What's going to challenge
me? And I thought, okay, it's either
going to be stage or television because
I haven't done really
that in any meaningful way as far as I'm
concerned. Some high school plays, a bad
television pilot that got, you know,
didn't get picked up. Um, and so I
thought, well, let's let's how am I
going to stay interested? Let's do let's
do something interesting on television.
You know, David Lynch had done Twin
Peaks and he reinvented
uh he introduced he took the the mass
tool of television, the episodic tool of
television and introduced surrealism to
to millions of people which is is
immense. Again, hopscotching
metatitually art synthesis. Holl did it.
you know, he was a genius designer and
he decided he wanted to take the mass
tool of JC Penney, but the snobs in New
York pooped on his head and it didn't
pick up. Now everybody's doing it. He
was ahead of the ahead of his time. So
now you see it everywhere. You see
Armani Exchange and and many people get
to enjoy designer style. This is
brilliant. Um, and so David did and I
thought, well, what can I do? What can I
do and change the format and stay
interested? with spider and war. I'm
hoping that I will have um instilled an
interest in younger generations to enjoy
the black and white style. I designed my
performance to fit in the black and
white format. That Howard Hawks way of
talking, that talking shiny, you know,
all that stuff was designed to fit in
the black and white format. So, now two
performance related uh questions that
I've been curious about. The first is
there's a movie that came out just a
couple years ago called Gunslingers. A
um a western.
>> This is interesting. This book
says Bible.
Read it. It's good.
>> And you your character does a voice that
I would describe as maybe like modern
blues man or something like that.
>> So what happened?
Okay.
>> Yeah. What was the voice?
>> Okay. Well, well, so what happened with
that was it's common knowledge. We had a
backto-back strike in Hollywood. And um
I suddenly got a phone call like, "You
need to do this right now or you know
you're going belly up." And I said, "Oh
no, really? How much time?" One week.
I'm like, "What am I gonna do? I want to
do this other movie, but they pushed.
They're not sure they're gonna go. How
am I going to be able to
afford to do the other movie, which is a
movie called Madden?
>> Oh, right.
>> So, the the double strike hit and I got
the phone call and I thought, "Oh, God,
please. I don't want to do another
commercial." I had done commercials in
Japan a million years ago and I got
burned there because it was I thought it
was um you never say never, but I
thought it was a toy. uh this little
pachinko machine that my cousin had in
his bedroom and we used to play it. I
did not know. And I asked, "Is there
anything wrong with this product in
Japan I should know about?" "No, it's a
toy." I said, "Okay." And then I turned
I did the the commercial, which was fun
and goofy and slapstick and what have
you, and I got to embrace my inner Jerry
Lewis.
>> Look,
I'm coming.
But it was uh basically Japanese
gambling. They don't do it for money.
They do it for toys and then you could
sell the toy, what have you. And that I
really was I I had umbrage with that.
And so I thought I really don't trust
this as as a a thing I should be doing
commercials. Plus, you know, I at a time
I was going through this thing with like
what would Jim Morrison do? Well, he
only lived to 27 sadly. And I I don't
know. I'm 62. I'm now older than many of
my
>> That's terrible advice. What would Jim
Morrison do? Well, my you know, he would
not do a commercial, but he didn't live
that long, so who knows what would have
happened. But anyway, long story short,
I didn't want to do it. And now I'm
older than Beethoven was when he died
and Humphrey Bogart and James Dean and
all these guys and John Lennon and all
these heroes of mine are. I'm now 62 and
I'm still here and I wanted to do this
movie Madden. I didn't know how I was
going to be able to buy the time to get
to Madden and I didn't want to do a
commercial. So along comes Gunslingers.
And I thought, okay, I'm a cameo in this
movie. Let's have some fun with it.
Could the movie be good? I don't know.
The director seems like a nice guy. And
I thought, but what can I bring that I'm
going to find amusing? And I remembered
going on Dick Kavitt a million years ago
with Miles Davis.
>> And Miles was like, you know, HE WAS HE
WAS SORT OF LIKE, UH, Nick
Yes, sir. Where where's your leather
jacket? My my my le MY LEATHER JACKET.
>> YEAH. DO YOU LEARN NOTHING FROM DENNIS?
DENNIS HOPPER, MAN. WHAT ARE YOU WEARING
THAT SUIT FOR? WELL, I I you know, and
then I was on the show doing this with
my hair was sticking up like Woody
Woodpecker again. Back to raising
Arizona. And and then I had this trumpet
with me and I wanted Miles to teach me
how to play the trumpet. And then the
trumpet fell down behind me. He was
like, "You be careful with that
instrument." And so then I got the
trumpet and I couldn't get a sound out
of it. It was so There's been a couple
times when I've really felt that
horrible. Three times in my life I
really felt that humiliating,
embarrassed feeling. One was that when I
couldn't get a sound out of trumpet with
the maestro.
One was when I had to sing Love Me Tener
to the president's wife at the Can Film
Festival on a table because David Lynch
demanded it. And one was when I couldn't
get the tune right on a harmonica in a
high school play. Uh all three were
disasters. Um, but to answer your
question, I was channeling what I
remembered that I loved about Miles's
sound and his voice and I plus I wanted
to wear a green bowler hat and I
thought, well, if I can do a Miles Davis
sound in a green bowler hat, I'm happy.
So, let's make the movie. Just let's
just make the stupid movie.
>> I'm still trying to get over the fact
you were asking yourself ever, what
would Jim Morrison do? When did that did
that ever go wrong?
Um, probably.
Yeah, probably. Should I really have
another whiskey? What would Jim Morrison
do?
>> Right.
>> Nope.
>> Yeah, he would say yes. He would say
yes.
>> Well, um, in Oh, go ahead.
>> No, I I I I'm a big fan of his poetry
and his his stage presence and his
voice. I think his voice, if you listen
to it today, sounds like it's so iconic.
It doesn't sound real. It's like how can
that come out of somebody really a human
being that that
um
what was come on come on come on now
touch me babe can't you see that I am
not afraid what was that promise that I
mean he just it's so full you know I
think my aunt my aunt knew him and UCLA
I think they would goal
>> yeah they would go for car rides
together and talk philosophy
>> he was a smart man apparently
And thus concludes the Jim Morrison
portion of this interview
>> in
>> it's probably best.
>> What can you tell me about playing John
Madden? I don't I actually was trying to
think about it. I don't think you've
played sort of an iconic real life
character before.
>> No, I really didn't know who he was. I
don't have in my view anyway much in
common with him. Um, David O' Russell is
someone that offered me a movie a
million years ago. I think it was uh
I don't remember the name of the movie,
but anyway, it was a good movie and he
offered it and I said no. And he's the
only director that I ever said no to who
actually came back and offered me
another movie. Most of them, they get
their feelings hurt or something and and
don't call you back. It's happened a
million times to me. It's happened with
Christopher Nolan. It's happened with
Woody Allen. It's happened with Paul
Thomas Anderson. They don't they don't
call me back. And I my schedule
>> What movie did Christopher Nolan and
Paul Thomas Anderson
>> Insomnia? The Paul Thomas Anderson movie
was a was a very early movie. He'd show
me a short film which was very good with
Philip Bigger Hall and we were going to
do something part.
>> Yeah. And it didn't work out. But
anyway, David did call me back and and I
I have I thought that that was really um
it showed a lot of class that he would
call me back and invite me again and I
didn't want to say no to him again
because I do have great respect for his
talent. And uh it was a beautiful
experience. I I enjoyed working with
David. I enjoyed working with Christian.
And I enjoyed working with all the
actors, John Melany. I mean, and we
really got in step with each other and
um so I'm glad I did it. Uh but again,
it was big challenge. It was a stretch.
I mean, it's not I don't think of myself
when I think of John Madden. So I was
like, okay, how can I get way out of my
comfort zone? Which I think we talked
about that was what David Bowie said to
me. I I asked him, I said, how did you
do it? How'd you keep reinventing
yourself? He said, I just never got
comfortable with anything I was doing.
And so that's stayed with me.
>> In a movie called, I believe it's called
Deadfall.
>> Yeah.
>> You your character looks to me like
you're doing uh a riff on Andy Kaufman's
alter ego, Tony Clifton.
>> No. And I've heard that before. That's
not true, though. I wasn't riffing Tony
at all. I was doing my own thing, which
is interesting
because I saw a screening of that movie
with Spike Jones who who had uh directed
me an adaptation and he loved that that
performance. And then I saw his Beasty
Boys video. I think it was called uh
what was the video? Uh uh Rampage.
They were all in like
>> Sabotage.
and they're all in like these bad wigs
and they all and these terrible
sunglasses. They all look like Eddie
from Deadfall. I said, "Oh, okay. I I
think I know where that came from."
>> Um but um no, I was um
>> that was another movie I didn't want to
make and I felt like I had to because it
was my brother and I said, "Okay, I'll
I'll do it." But directed it. Yeah. can
I do that will make it interesting for
me, you know, and what can I bring to
this? So, I just went full ID release,
just full
um I didn't care if it made sense or it
didn't. I just wanted to do this like
live wire performance in a bad wig and
an upturn nose. So, the nose kind of
went out and then up like that. And I'm
just I and I'm very proud of that
performance. Uh I I I I do I do think it
uh I think it endures.
>> Um earlier you said uh you you pointed
to a film you did a couple years ago
called Dream Scenario as sort of being
the uh the culmination in some ways of
of what you were doing. And Dream
Scenario for people who didn't see it,
it was you played a college professor
who starts showing up in people's
dreams. Yeah. C. But can you can you
explain what was going on in that
performance that that makes you say
makes you point to it as a kind of
culmination?
>> Well, I think that because I was
contending with this sort of meme uh
meification, I coined the word
memeification. I don't think it was ever
used before. this memeification that I
had lived through and needed to find a
place to put it and that was the perfect
vessel because the memes were not unlike
the dreams and so the dreamification of
um
>> my character in dream scenario was
similar to me to the memeification of
Nicholas Cage
>> it's interesting that you bring up dream
scenario
as as a way to address the memeification
because I was wondering if that was part
of the intention for doing that film and
it was interesting because it also that
movie came not too long after you did
the unbearable weight of massive talent
in which you played uh you played a
version of yourself and someone who's
also and the character Nicholas Cage in
that film was also kind of contending
with
uh a public perception that he was
uncomfortable with and in in my
perception the the sort of feverish
memeification has basically disappeared
since uh Dream Scenario and since The
Unbearable Weight of Massive Talent and
I wondered if in taking on films that
directly addressed that if you were
trying to sort of puncture that so that
the fever would break.
>> Well, not not consciously. No. Um but
that's an interesting observation.
Has it? I didn't know that. I I I don't
know if it has.
>> I I think so.
>> Oh, well that's interesting. What is a
meme really? I mean, what is that? Is
that Is that a a snapshot of something
that happened culturally? like uh uh I I
think it's interesting to look at that
communication
as a result of some of my performances
that it would land in cyberspace in such
a way that my face and vampires kiss
became the you don't say meme. I mean I
I I I don't know. I I I think I'm
flattered by it on some level. you know
that it it communicated
and it was remembered
that
um potently that it it got into a whole
new um
technology that I wasn't even aware of
when I made Vampires cuz it didn't
exist. You know, it's um I that's how
I'm choosing to look at it. I think
positively it kept me in the
conversation. I have a a different a
slightly different theory for why you
some of your stuff in particular got
me'd. And I I think it's also ultimately
a a flattering uh theory, too. But I I
think one of the things that memes do is
also I realize now as I'm talking I
sound like a jackass pontificating about
what memes do, but I'm just going to I'm
just going to continue sounding like a
jackass.
>> It doesn't sound like a jackass.
Sounds interesting.
>> But but uh you know memes are are sort
of the the the purest encapsulation of a
particular feeling or sentiment
>> that uh than is otherwise being
expressed. So like the example of the
the vampires kissed you don't say meme
that is capturing a feeling.
>> Yeah.
>> And an emotion that people have in the
purest possible form. And that's why it
gets passed around because people use it
as a shortorthhand for a feeling that
that they're having. And seeing in that
light, I think actually
>> stuff getting me'd a signal that you
were doing your in your instance, in
your case, we're doing the job
correctly. I would say
>> I think that there is a
need
for a um
vessel
vicariously
for folks who are good citizens
who are doing their best to be
upstanding members of the community
to live through and get their yayas out.
Whether they're angry yayas or happy
yayas or whatever whatever it is I I
think
and I don't know how conscious I was of
it but that
that has communicated through some of
the meltdown performances in my work
>> where people can tap into it
>> and live through it without having to go
and do it whether it's mashix mashik men
in the pharmacy you know would you like
take you out on the street and pass
blood, you know, or flipping out and
vampires Kiss or or whatever it is. I
think that that perhaps
more than anything else is what has
enabled me
to endure.
people that I gravitated towards
like James Dean when he um did Rebel
Without a Cause, he was speaking to I
was 15 when I discovered that. I knew
what that felt like. And so I think as
as a as a person that enjoys being an
audience member, I I find these actors
or personalities in cinema
that have helped me
find my own identity or understand what
I was going through in my own life. It
happened, you know, with Bruce Lee. It
happened with Travolta and Saturday
Night Fever. And it gave me a feeling of
like, oh, I can I can do this.
>> Yeah. Did uh you ever tell John Travolta
that his performance is happening?
>> Sure. Well, what happened was
>> Yeah.
>> What's funny face off,
>> right? Right. What happened was
literally I was going to Horus man
elementary school
and uh I used to go to the um tropical
aquarium store. Even then, I was
interested in fish. And I had these two
buckets of tropical fish in my hands and
I had the the the t-shirt with the, you
know, just no sleeves walking with the
buckets. And I thought I was Tony uh
from Saturday Night Fever walking Monero
walking down the street. And lo and
behold,
>> I'm at the stoplight waiting to cross
near the school and upglides John
Travolta in a blue Adidas tracksuit and
a gold I think it was a 250 SL Mercedes.
And he's looking at me and I'm looking
at him like, "Oh my god, I'm I'm you
right now and you're over there with my
buckets of not paint but fish." that
happened and then kind of willed it into
Face Off.
>> Um, I have a million more uh of specific
questions about acting and performance,
but can I just do like a quick rapidfire
Nicholas Cage uh lore
series of questions and you tell me if
they're true or not.
>> Okay, I'm in your hands.
>> Uh,
>> let's have it. For better or worse,
>> no, it's all good. What What What have
you got?
>> I got a bunch.
>> Okay,
>> so here's the first one. Vampires Kiss
in a There was a sex scene and you asked
to have hot yogurt poured on your toes
during the sex scene.
>> Um,
there was there was some yogurt. There
wasn't hot yogurt.
And I think I was administering the
yogurt to myself.
>> But why? I I I don't I don't really
remember.
>> Yeah.
>> Who knows?
>> It's better that you don't.
>> Who knows? Okay, next one.
>> Uh there there was an an old uh Playboy
interview from maybe mid 80s, late '
80s, something like that. And there's
just a an off-hand reference to stealing
an aquarium from the Museum of Modern
Art.
>> Oh,
>> did that happen?
>> Yeah. Well, it wasn't an aquarium and it
wasn't it was in California and it was a
uh it was in the trash. It was a um a
lucite box that covers um art artifacts.
Um and I just took it and I used it as
an enclosure for a um king snake. So,
not stealing technically.
>> No, not really. No, it was in trash,
>> I would say. Yeah, reusing.
>> Trash picking.
>> All right, last last one for last one
for now. I might come back to some
others, but um so apparently at Graceand
there's a there's a private familyonly
area. And I read that you were granted
access to the private area and tried on
some of the king's clothes and sat in
the bathroom in the same position that
Elvis was found in when he was found
dead. Is that true?
>> No, that's not true at all. What is true
is um
you know my ex-wife and I um
>> Lisa Marie Presley
>> we when it was great we we we were we
were very close and we had a lot of
laughs and there were a couple of nights
at Graceand where she went wanted to go
upstairs and so I did and and I remember
lying in Elvis's bed and and he had this
you know those little fiber optics
things that spin and change colors
>> like a lava lamp.
>> Not a lava lamp, but not unlike a lava
lamp, but little fiber optics and it it
rotates and then they they can change
colors like green and blue and little
little little
plastic like
>> strings that that like whiskers that
stand out and they can change colors.
They're usually sitting on top of a a
light box that changes colors as it
rotates. And I remember staring at that
and being very relaxed by it and calmed
by it and and I enjoyed thinking of him
looking at that and how it might have
must have relaxed him. So it was kind of
a beautiful poignant little moment in my
life.
>> Um okay so acting is in a lot of ways is
all about choices right? the choices
that both the choices that the actor
chooses to make within the performance
and the the choices that the the choices
the actor makes about what performances
to to do. I think you're you're sort of
known in some ways for making
unconventional choices in performance or
doing doing the unexpected thing or the
surprising thing. And I I I want to know
about the difference between making
choices in art versus making choices in
life. And I I assume that in art you're
able to be very intentional and and
decisive about the choices you make. Are
you able to to access that kind of
control in life also? or do choices in
life present difficulties that choices
in art don't
uh don't don't present
>> I think that's a pretty um astute
question and within the question I think
there's perhaps some observation I I um
it's no secret that I have over the
years particularly early on perhaps had
lack of impulse control and probably
shouldn't have bought that car or
shouldn't have bought about that
property or whatever it was. Um,
and yes, in art, the comedian in me is
looking for the surprise. You get a
laugh when you do something unexpected.
That's what makes people laugh in my
view or you do something marvelously
witty. But it's usually the the surprise
element that that evokes a laugh
response. So there's a lot that that
part of my pallet is always at work with
the tragic part and sometimes at the
same time. Um but in my own personal
life,
for example, when you met me seven years
ago,
I was more interested in other habits
than I am now. I am extraordinarily
boring right now. I live a very monastic
life. I am not taking any risks
whatsoever if I can avoid it. I am
really going to go the other way. And I
am all about
raising my three and a halfyear-old, my
toddler for to have a happy and healthy
life. That is my focus. And that and
when I work those that's it. you know,
my two boys are grown up and um
I mean I do have vices. I mean I I drink
entirely too much caffeine. I'm drinking
200 mgram, you know, strawberry energy
drinks six times a day and I'm not good
with my phone and the doom scrolling's
got to stop. They're not good de vices
to have. They're not good for your
psyche.
But I'm not enjoying a martini, which I
did like my martinis and and I'm not um
doing other things. I mean, I'm I am
pretty monastic. Um so
to answer your question, I'm not doing
any unexpected uh things in life at the
moment. I I have to say I I was
wondering about the question almost in
more of a um like a cognitive
uh uh like a a mechanical cognitive way
because
I think this is again I'm just
pontificating in a way that I probably
shouldn't do because it makes me sound
like I have uh know things that I don't
know but I think one of the real secrets
to life at least for me has been uh
realizing like if you can just get get
in between the impulse and a thought.
You can really live a much a much
healthier life, you know, like you can
if you can just consciously decide, oh,
I I feel this, but I don't have to act
on the feeling. I can take a step back
and decide actually what I would want to
do or what would be the prudent thing or
the better thing to do in a given
situation. And I it seems like with
acting you're
one of the gifts is to be able to do
that to say okay my character is
thinking and feeling this. What is the
best way for me to respond to in order
to deliver the performance I want? Um
are you able to have that kind of
perspective on day-to-day
life choices where you can step back in
the moment and say how do I want to move
forward right now?
>> Yes, I am. Ah, and is it the same kind
of thought process? No.
>> Is is it the same kind of ah tell me
tell the difference two different
muscles. One is a
um trained
through years of experience
understanding of my instrument and what
I can contribute on the set for a
specific character and performance and
with my co-stars that will flow and
collaborate in such a way that we can
have a spark and hope hopefully
entertain you. The other is just sort of
saying, well, you're doing this and I am
not going to get angry because I'm not
gonna
I'm gonna let you do that and and be
patient and take it in and think about
what I can do to diffuse
but without engaging and that I find
very easy. I mean, when I was 19, no.
Uh, now I'm 62. Sure. I I'm I'm I I know
I think I know what to do and what not
to do, whether it's at home or in a
restaurant or out in public, whatever. I
I I first thing I do is I don't go out
if I don't think I can meet people.
Well,
that's a choice. And when I do meet
someone, I'm I know what it means to to
meet someone that I admire and have them
ruin your day by being unkind.
My favorite pillars of the human spirit,
which I'm a big believer in, are
kindness, compassion, wisdom, and love.
And you know, I I want to embody those
pillars when I meet people.
>> Who was the hero you met that was not
kind to you?
to hear you, Matt.
>> I uh
I I I I
don't want to say it because I still
love him
and and I don't want to um
he's extremely famous. I mean, and I
don't want to upset him.
>> Yeah. And sort of a two-part question.
Do do you envision, you know, if not
retiring, at least sort of ramping down
the the um amount of time you spend
acting, especially given that you have
such a young child at home.
>> Definitely. Yeah. Though that's
>> And then what what would you do if you
weren't acting so often? Because I know
in the past you've said things like, you
know, you need to act to live. So how
how would you fill that space?
>> Again, David, I'm all about my toddler.
I mean I that she
um takes
80% of my energy and I'm I'm focused on
that. So I'm I'm there's it's not about
how how can I fill the time. It's more
about can I find the time that I can
be there to nurture her and and guide
her. Um, and I'm lucky right now because
she's young enough that as long as we
can travel together and I can come home
to her, that's good. But, uh, yeah, that
is, um, on my mind, how I'm going to,
uh, compartmentalize my time. And just
the the last question is uh you know I
know early in your career you were
interested in the idea of sort of devel
developing a mythology around yourself
of kind kind of becoming you know a
larger than life character. I think
you're looking quizzical. Is that not
the case?
>> No. I'm thinking about it. I'm thinking
about what you're asking me and I'm
putting I'm connecting the dots. A and
you know whether you realize it or not
you definitely have achieved that and
and are to a lot of people a kind of
larger than-l life character or figure
in the way that other kind of older
Hollywood uh icons might be. I think of
somebody like you know like a Dennis
Hopper or something or a Brando who sort
of reputation precedes them in a way and
they have a mythology around them and I
I want to know like what's been what was
what was good about achieving that and
and what was more challenging because
you might be larger than life but I
think well it's your life that that
you're living that the other people are
are viewing. That's a really um
uh profound I think question because I
I'm still trying to find my answer to it
and
it's pretty deep. Um yes, when I began I
wanted to cultivate this mythology
around myself.
That was before we had this thing called
the internet. And I didn't know
that it would go that far, that it would
be that widespread. Did I think could I
didn't have the means to imagine that
one day it would become this thing we
call memes or would go into different
cultures around the world or whatever it
is that the internet deploys. So I I
think it it went beyond what I initially
was trying to cultivate a a mystique, an
aura, an enig in enigmatic presence, a
mystery, all that beautiful stuff that
the um black and white golden age as we
call them, Bogarts and Kagnes, Betty
Davis's had before
um there was so much television and
certainly before the internet.
>> Yeah. I guess another way of putting it
would be what was gained in a in
achieving the goal of developing a
personal mythology and what was lost.
Well, I I think that there may have
become um
you know, it's like I grew up watching
David Keredin in kung fu and I saw him
in a movie and he didn't do any kung fu
and I was disappointed. And so maybe
there's an element of like gosh, I
really want to see Nick go off the rails
and I'm not going to give them that
every time and I hope they're not
disappointed, you know.
>> And what was the good thing about it
about having achieved the goal that you
>> well set out for yourself in your early
but it wasn't the goal? The goal was to
create that mystery, that inigmatic
>> aura. This is something else that I had
no reference point that it would happen.
And so I'm still trying to to So what
can I say that? What's the good thing?
Um the good thing is it kept me in the
zeitgeist or it kept me in the
conversation for better or for worse.
But is it perfect for me? No. Because
that's not what the movie's necessarily
about. That little two-cond moment. If
you really want to see how the character
got there, you need to watch the whole
thing. It's not just little screenshots
of little gifs or whatever they call
them. It's it's something building to
that eruption, if you will. And so maybe
it's lost, you know, because
now you hear all this conversation about
attention spans and they getting reduced
and no one has time for that. So now
they're just seeing you don't say or
what, you know. So I don't know if
that's what I had in mind. I I what I
had in mind was movies like Midnight
Cowboy and Rebel Without a Cause and
Last Tango in Paris. I had in mind
movies that you would go and sit down
and watch. I didn't have sound bites and
gifs in mind.
>> Yeah. Well, you do have movies that
people go and sit down and watch. So,
>> thank you.
>> So, thank you for taking all the time to
to speak with me. I appreciate it.
>> Thanks for having me, David. It's always
a pleasure to have our conversations.
I'm Lulu Garcia Navaro
>> and I'm David Maresy
>> and we're the hosts of the interview an
audio and video podcast from the New
York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.